Once about Prairie View. Prairie View. I said, I
think I made the appointment because I wanted to
talk with him. I was quite prepared to do what we
could to help political science at Prairie View.
And I told Dr. Williams at the moment, the
Department of Political Science at Prairie View
is headed by a man with a master's degree in
education.
who is scared of President Thomas. They will not,
Thomas will not allow their students to come to us
for an MPA. One of their assistants in the
admissions office wanted to come. I'm sure Thomas
said no. I had a faculty member, a woman, who'd been
on the faculty A&M. I can't give you her name
offhand. Black woman. In terms of affirmative
action, you can't be more affirmative. And she was
good. She now has a PhD and is teaching, I think, in
Louisiana Southern, maybe. And
I said, what can be done about this? And I'll never
forget William's part. What we really ought to do
is close it up. Did you see the morning paper in the
Houston op-ed? Yes. They're a law and medical
school. Because I thought, in terms of
management, neither Texas Southern or Prairie
View have a very good record. The more recent
generals have been somewhat of an improvement.
Let's see, Dr. Williams and Dr. Calhoun
move out from university-level administration
in the mid-'70s, six and seven, and Jarvis Miller
and Mac Prescott take over. Did that change
anything for you as a department head? Not a lot.
Prescott was very helpful because it was under him
the MPA went through. and he was a guiding piece and
so on.
Environmental design wanted in on it, several
people wanted to cut in on it by that point and he
held the line and we went with the design that it had
been. Jarvis Miller I had no connection with
except we all remember when he said everybody will
be in their offices from eight to five.
and what he thought was going on. He apparently had
seen some people jogging at odd hours, and there
was interesting reactions to that. But
no, no special problem. The school was growing so
rapidly and all the rest, we were hitting the
problem of large classes. And how did you all face
that? with large classes. But taught by? I
insisted. Oh, one thing my predecessor had done
was to do 206
and 7 by lectures and assistant professors, upper
division by associate professors, and graduate
work by full professors. I said, I'm sorry, this is
coming to a screeching halt. And everybody will at
least have one section of 206 and 7. And I took an
honors course in 206 myself as my one teaching job
for the moment, my way of illustration. But all
sections were taught by faculty. Yes. I'll say
with a few exceptions, I did give some graduate
assistants a section after they'd been here as
graduate students at least one year. Can you share
any goofy, loony, only at A&M-like events that you
coped with as a department head?
Well, I was told that if I hadn't been coming, that
the departmental graduate students, of whom
there were three or four on the highly liberal
side, would have hung rubber rudder in effigy that
spring, which would have been an interesting
problem to inherit.
No, I don't know anything startling. Any jokes
that got played on any faculty member by the
students or anything like that? Not that I can
think of. We did have one faculty member harassing
the lady graduate students who finally left.
Did you ever have any midnight calls by anybody
about anything supposedly happening in the
department?
One funny one involves Linda.
I get a call that
Linda would like to come talk to me, and she is the
wife of Ralph Hambrick, who is an assistant
professor, very good.
We
weren't sure at first. No, I'm sorry. Hamrick's
wife is not named Linda. Hamrick's wife is
calling, sir, like Mary or something. She wants to
talk to him. Well, we're over across the road over
there, and she comes to our house to talk. She said,
Oh, dear, I've got problems. My husband is going
with somebody else. And if it
just weren't for Linda, I thought, oh, God, Linda
is Gary Holder's wife. For God's sake, where are we
into it? Well, it turned out Linda is also the name
of one of our secretaries. So I kept a straight face
to find out what, Linda, are we talking about?
It turned out that it was the... The secretary. Our
departmental secretary.
And eventually, Ralph and his wife divorce, and he
marries Linda. And Ralph is now at the University
of Richmond, and full professor, and Linda is his
wife. But it was a little uncertain for a bit whose
wife. Did anyone ever, from outside the
appropriate scope of the department, did anyone
try to ever intervene to meddle? An A&M former
student, a board member, a politician? Anybody
try to influence an admission or a grade? No more.
You're talking about the senator? Yeah, Bull of
the Brassets.
Well, I got word from the dean that
one
of my lectures,
Dan
is now with the
controller's office in Florida, I think, Dan
Burns, had made comments about political
corruption in Texas. And
Moore had made the cover of Time at one time in
connection with the scandals prior to Ben Barnes
and the rest of it. and that Moore was after Dan
Burns. Well, I went to Benton, and I said, what?
Well, Benton said, we've got a clipping file over
in the library. And he got me all the clippings
about Moore's insurance scandal activities,
into which he was up to his ass in problems. and made
a Xerox of them for me. And I sent that file about
Moore to Maxwell. And I never heard another word.
Now, what went on, I don't know.
Did you ever get a complaint from a parent or anyone
about us? Yes, on Elias Thermos for teaching
revolution.
Because on his reading list is Das Kapital and
several other books. They're not required
reading, but on the reading list. And I called
Elias and I said, what gives? He said, well, we
discussed revolution, of course, and the
political theory. I said, OK. Don't worry, Elias.
I think I can take care of this. And I
said, We have a policy in political science,
particularly in light of our situation in A&M and
the military, that we have a policy that it is
absolutely essential that you know your enemy.
I never heard any more.
Did anyone ever try to... Excuse me. Don't
forget... OK, I was about to ask, did anyone ever
try to, from outside the appropriate scope of the
department, ever try to influence a grade that
someone received or might receive?
Not really. I never had any particular pressure. I
handled
a great appeal once, which caused me to give some
thought to the A&M judicial system. I was acting
head one Christmas vacation for Kirkpatrick. And
a
great appeal came in from
a student and his parents because if it stood, he
wasn't going to graduate.
And complaints on George Edwards.
who is an assistant professor, I think at the time,
maybe associate,
and
on the examination grade. I
discussed it with them and they accepted. I said, I
will have that paper read by And we discussed who,
and I said, what about Professor Benton? Yes, he
said, that would be appropriate. So I had
Professor Benton read the paper. And Benton
gave it a D. Now, I said, that is so close to the grade
that you got, I will not change the grade. He
appealed to the judicial committee, and the
judicial committee overturned the thing without
consideration. And the student judicial
committee, and there's some faculty on it too, did
not support the faculty. And I figured there are
two problems with it. One is there's no way for
faculty to appeal that kind of thing. And second,
there's no training in the student judicial body
in proper evidential procedures.
But correct me if I'm wrong, in your years I didn't
hear you say that some legislator, some
self-appointed important Aggie called you up to
get so-and-so passed or get so-and-so admitted,
no outside information. If you were looking back
on those... Next to nothing. I can't think of
anything on that. Looking back over those years in
the department, which department members do you
think deserve the greatest praise? I'm not going
to ask you the negative. If you were giving pats on
the back, who would get the most?
I think, in many ways, Gary Holder. Why? Explain. I
don't disagree with you. I'm just asking you to
elaborate. He was a first-rate teacher. He did not
publish much. He is now doing more. And he
has handled the student
advising function for years. drive most people to
drink. I always advocated that this kind of
service function, somebody has to do. And
Warren Dixon was not publishing much, but he was
doing the laboratory.
developing that. And I said to the faculty, or to
the dean, I said, I want to give tenure to both Dixon
and Holder who they haven't published much for
their service and their things. I said, a
department's got to have a few people who are
willing to do the sub-administrative work that is
absolutely essential. And they were willing to
pick up things. It was at some cost to them. I didn't
care whether they were, some other people are
going to write and so on, but they were both very
good at what they did. Typist, this is an editorial
note. When Gary Halter was a sophomore, he was in
one of my classes, And it was my policy then, my wife
and I would have each of my classes over to our house
for a reception and to get acquainted near the end
of the semester. And on this particular evening,
this young sophomore transfer student from
Wichita Falls, Gary Halter, stayed after
everybody else left and told me he was thinking
about dropping out of school, wasn't sure he was
making much progress. Did I have any advice for
him? We chatted a long time and I tried to persuade
him that I thought he had many of the capabilities
that a good faculty member needed. And I urged him,
since he said he was short of money, go back home to
Wichita Falls and take another year at Midwestern
University that he had attended as a freshman.
Since then, he has told me that that advice that
evening was rather important to him, because at
that point, he didn't know where else to turn. So
let's add that as an editorial note here. Any other
faculty? Yes, Arnold Bedlitz. I hired Arnold
around 75. I had $9,000
left in the budget, and I called down to Houston to
see who they had, and Arnold was available, and I
told Arnold, almost sight unseen, I said, I've got
$9,000 if you want to come for that for the year.
Why, you can have it. And he came. He's been here
ever since. And I think done a superb job. And after
three or four years, I could begin to close the
salary gap that was there. Was it good that you, as
the department head, had the authority to go out
and do the looking? Was that better than having a
big search committee? Well, I always had the
authority and kept it for lectures or
instructors. Assistant professors, we had
committees.
Let me do some quick things for teaching that I had
to do. Outside of the department, were there any
other department heads that were good allies for
the department? Well, John Pearson, I mentioned
in business, worked together very nicely. We
worked together very well with Samson in,
what engineering was he in? Chuck Samson? Chuck
Samson. I see, civil? Civil engineering. Civil
engineering had the first training program for
city managers in the United States, as far as we
know. And they were helpful in providing
engineering for non-engineers and some special
work in street engineering in cities, etc. And
Samson and I functioned very well. The sociology
and anthropology were in Bolton a bit, and we
worked out the laboratory thing among us. Those
have been... In hindsight, can you think of any
missed opportunities for the department or the
campus during those years?
Looking back now...
No, I don't think as much.
Were there any proposals you sent forward
relating to the department that got scuttled?
No, the main one that was scuttled for a while was
the MPA. But it's simply because of the
coordinating board.
Is there any advice? Let's make believe now you're
anointed to be the advisor to the department, to
the college, to the university. What advice would
you give today to each of those levels?
What should political science be aspiring to do
today?
Well, I'm in general sympathy with the
department, except political science
departments generally have got a problem. For as
I'm concerned, the field of public law is going
into decline, as there was a period when public
administration was.
The department does not have It has Judith Bair,
who's superb. She'd just gotten a prize from ASPA,
American Political Science Association, for a
book on women and law. And we had originally Benton
and Woods
for de-emphasis in public law, which strikes me as
idiocy. And we have nobody in international law.
You kind of get that problem. And
the behavioral number stuff is very heavy, but I
don't have any great problem with that. So that
would be the main criticism I would have of the
department. What about at the university level?
What advice would you give today's leadership, if
any?
Well, the Vision 2000 is interesting. I was just
taking a look at it a while back because I'm working
on a set of bylaws for the Bush School. As my wife
tells friends occasionally, he does bylaws.
I offered to play with it. I'm a parliamentarian
for the Senate and so on. And I did the bylaws for the
College of Liberal Arts. There has been a
tendency, Maxwell was the last dean who really
emphasized faculty participation in the entire
operation of the college. We had a monthly faculty
meeting which handled the business, the academic
business of the college. The Department of Law
proposal, it went through the entire faculty. The
committee system backing it up and
recommendations, et cetera.
Your history man who succeeded, and I cannot think
of his name, the man who now dean. Oh, came from
Oklahoma. Yeah.
And he's now at Telluride, Colorado. I think so.
Then the fellow who came out of psychology, who's
now at Maryland, the next dean. He was here for
several years. Okay, I can't think of it either.
But he was here, and he ended Maxwell's faculty for
an elected small policy committee. And I think it
shot communications through the college. And
ever since Williams, I have not sensed any
interest in the administration up above that
there be really much faculty governance. Now this
creation of the faculty senate by our historian.
Frank Vandiver. Vandiver is an exception in that.
And because it's got authority to, it can't.
override the board or the president, but it's got
authority to talk about any damn thing it wants to,
really. It has almost any connection to the
academic work. And we have not had regular faculty
meetings. There's one faculty meeting a year, I
think, in the college, which is a pro forma thing
for making awards.
And the Vision 2000 doesn't do much more. There's a
sentence about governance, and there's a
backhanded reference to faculty in the last
sentence of that. Do you think that in the Vision
2020, the goal of A&M moving up within the next 20
years to be one of the top 10 public institutions in
the country, do you think that is an appropriate
goal? Is it reachable? It's reachable if anybody
will put money to it. And I...
It depends on the... Top echelon.
And I view part of his, I view the president as very
good. I view the next layers as highly
questionable.
I'm nodding in agreement with you on that. Let's
move to the Bush Library. When did you become aware
that there was going to be an effort by Texas A&M to
attract the presidential library of George Bush?
Oh, I wasn't terribly aware of it. Let's see, we
began to get discussions of this
Because very early, and I'm working on a history of
the Bush School.
And very early on, within six months of Hal Booty's
visit to Bush in, what the hell is it, 80 or 81 or 79?
Oh, when he's elected? Yeah. Oh, he's elected in
88. He's elected.
That's right. He's elected, excuse me, but he
isn't in the office yet. That's right. He calls on
him late in November 1988. Yeah, okay. Because
within two or three months of that, the school is
part of the deal. And having been involved with the
MPA program, we're immediately... brought on it
as to how does this fit.
So I'm aware there are negotiations
fairly early. It's
a bit of a surprise. As Lewis Newman, who was on the
committee, talked to Rotary not long after the
decision was made, he said, He was present in
Houston when Rice and Houston and we made
presentations. And he said it was very odd Kathy
Whitmer was making one for Houston, I think. But it
was in general terms as if they both took it for
granted it would be one of them, but did not have an
awful lot in concrete where A&M had the land, had a
school in mind, had the
driveway named,
and it was already on the drawing boards exactly
where the hell it would be. Can you think of any
misstep A&M made in that process? No. I don't know
of any. Who are the people, as far as you know? The
main one, I've heard him say this. He said, after
all, Yale hugged me in effigy twice.
And I've reported that to friends. Which A&M
people deserve pats on the back most for the Bush
Library being here? Al Booney and, oh, another
board member who'd been, I can't remember. John
Lindsay? Lindsay.
And then the A&M administration handled it well,
didn't they? Yes, the OX business dean who then got
chatted to him. And Perry Atkinson was the
chancellor. Perry Atkinson, chancellor of... At
no point appearing
to be either
uninterested or obstructed. Now, were people in
the real world of academia called upon in an
appropriate fashion as the A&M plans are being
formulated? Well, the Senate was called on.